hello everybody my name is Jay and I'm
one of the expert IELTS teachers here at
e2 language in this class we're going to
look at IELTS writing task 2 and we're
going to concentrate on paragraph
structure now whoa
IELTS writing task 2 is tough I think
one of the most overlooked thing is the
word count to be honest
you need to write at least 250 words and
I don't know if you've written with a
pencil for a long time but writing 250
words with a pencil is tough so there's
the word count but there's also
structure if you go into this exam with
a good structure in your mind not a
template you're not memorizing any
phrases or anything like that but if you
go in with a good structure especially
how to structure your paragraphs then
you're going to do well if you don't and
you're going there and just do it
willy-nilly you're going to have
problems okay so I'm gonna teach you how
to write some good paragraphs so the
focus of this lesson is I'm going to
show you how to write two types of
paragraphs that you can use in your
writing task - and I'll show you what
those are and I'll show you when to use
each one but it's essential that you
understand this and it's essential that
you take these structures into your exam
so first let's just we're gonna base
today's lesson on the problems solutions
essay prompt because I think it's
probably one of the more difficult ones
let's read this question prompt it says
hold on let me get my pen here it says
every year more and more students choose
to study online rather than attempt
attend or other classes on campus what
do you think are the causes of this and
what solutions can you suggest this is
one of the more challenging question
prompts because it's asking you for
causes plural and solutions plural in
other words more than one this because
of this we need two different paragraph
structures ok so last week we looked at
introductions and if you have not seen
that video yet please watch it here or
here I forget which side it's on please
watch the introductions lesson first
so you know how to fashion those but let
me just quickly recap how to write the
introduction so last week we looked at
how to write a three sentence
introduction that fits every single
question prompt you write a neutral
background sentence that is let's say
the question prompts about artificial
intelligence so your right a neutral no
opinion
that's what neutral means no opinion
just a background sentence about
artificial intelligence or let's say the
question prompts about I don't know
public transport you write a neutral no
opinion background sentence about public
transport second sentence you rewrite
the question in your own words and the
third sentence is you write this essay
will discuss blah blah blah
okay that leads or let's let me just
show you what that what that looks like
in writing so here's our broad
background neutral statement studying
online is becoming increasingly popular
then we really write the question in our
second sentence each year more students
up to study online as opposed to
attending classes on campus and then the
third sentence we say this essay will
discuss why this is happening and put
forward several solutions for this issue
fine that now leads us to our paragraphs
which is well all aspects of the essay
are critical the introduction is
important the paragraphs are important
the conclusions are important but you
need to get your paragraphs right and
you need to practice this before test
day okay cool
so here's the first type of paragraph
that you can use and this is extremely
what can I say it's extremely useful
it's a great utility you can use it for
almost all of the different in fact you
can use it for all of the IELTS question
prompts it's a four sentence paragraph
you have an opening sentence a
supporting sentence you give evidence
and then you have a closing sentence
okay you need to practice this you need
to memorize this structure before test
day because you can use this paragraph
for all of the different question
prompts the other paragraph I'll show
you in a second is a bit different but
this one's critical this is really the
one that you use 90% of the time it's a
great paragraph structure because it's
logical and it connects let me show you
what I mean by that so I'm going to show
you in a second what it looks like but
you have an opening sentence which is a
sort of broad it's it's focuses on
a specific idea but it just introduces
that idea that's your opening sentence
and that connects to your supporting
sentence where you add some information
to the opening sentence then you give
some evidence like an example or a
statistic or something like that and
then you close the paragraph off with a
closing sentence which connects back to
your opening sentence okay so it's a
really nice logical structure and the
IELTS examiner's like it cool so again
here's our problem solution prompt that
we saw before every year more and more
students choose to study online rather
than attend classes on campus what do
you think are the causes of this what
solutions can you suggest okay so when I
read this prompt I see this causes here
and I'm gonna write one paragraph about
one particular cause I'm gonna write
another paragraph about a different
cause of why students study online
rather than attend campus and I'm gonna
write one paragraph this would be my
paragraph 3 about the solutions so we're
going to use this paragraph structure
that I just showed you for p1 and p2 I'm
going to show you a different structure
for p3 so let's look at cause 1 the
cause of why people study online rather
than attend two universities so let's go
through this I'm going to show you my
paragraph and then I'm gonna get you to
write one so just be prepared so again
my introduction studying online is
becoming increasingly popular that's my
background sentence now I rewrite the
question
prompt each year more students opt to
study online as opposed to attending
classes on campus now I write my this
essay will sentence this essay we'll
discuss why this is happening and put
forward several solutions for this issue
this essay will discuss one why this is
happening so now I write my paragraph
one here first and foremost students are
increasingly studying online because of
the convenience factor I've just written
that twice there that's a mistake
so convenience ok this opening sentence
needs to be sort of it needs to be broad
yet specific if you know what I mean
there it needs to focus on one idea only
ok you can't say students are studying
online because it's convenient and
affordable that's going to be
problematic because then in your
paragraph you're going to have to write
about convenience and affordability you
don't want to mix your paragraphs you
just want to say students are studying
online because it's convenient and you
stick to one idea per paragraph that way
then you can use the four sentence
structure because what you're doing is
you're elaborating on that one idea if
you said it's for convenience and
affordability then you get stuck because
you start writing about convenience you
realize you haven't put anything about
affordability so you stuff your
sentences together and that's not a good
thing to do so the key point here is to
have one paragraph one idea okay that's
why I underlined this for you because
it's about convenient so that was my
opening sentence now I put my supporting
sentence where I add information to my
opening sentence put simply it is far
easier to study from one's bedroom than
to travel to university each day
especially if the university is located
far from where one lives now I need some
evidence or some examples while some
University students might live on campus
in which case attending classes is
really convenient most do not they may
live on the other side of the city which
makes it extremely inconvenient for them
to attend classes now I have my closing
sentence which sort of goes back to this
first sentence here in some as
technology enables on-demand study
people will seldom attend classes in
person because they can simply study
from wherever they are whenever they
want now you'll notice the most
important thing here is here with this
paragraph one is it was only about
convenience I did not talk about
affordability I did not talk about
effectiveness I did not talk about
anything else other than online study is
convenient and that was why students are
studying online because it's convenient
I did not write about anything else
cool your turn I want you to write one
paragraph about how the convenience of
online learning is resulting in fewer
students attending university classes I
want you to use the four sentence
paragraph structure that I showed you so
I want an opening sentence that mentions
convenience just in general then I want
a supporting sentence that adds
information to that idea about
convenience then I want some evidence
like an example or an instance or a
statistic then I want a closing sentence
that links back to the opening sentence
and basically says the same thing in
different words so I want you to pause
the yes if you're on YouTube you can
pause the video and write this so it
should take you about four minutes one
minute per sentence or even less okay
but for you guys right now I'm gonna
time you I want you to write this
sentence sorry this paragraph I'll give
you four minutes put it into the
comments below or the chat your time
starts now
alright let me just check in on you guys
online education is becoming popular
among students nowadays ok now I want
one on convenience convenience is one of
the major driving factors for students
to attend online classes traveling each
day from one's home to the university
leads to exertion and it also kills a
lot of time especially if a student is
living at the far end city traffic leads
to a lot of chaos in today's era which
makes traveling a huge task for students
University classes are less preferred by
students as the online classes offer
them a lot of convenience in terms of
timing and flexibility really really
good excellent the only issue is you use
the word kill time which is a bit
informal but other than that that's an
excellently structured paragraph
beautifully structured well done online
learning becomes one of the mode for
online for learning no no we're writing
about convenience convenience that first
sentence should have the word
convenience in it this paragraph is
about convenience of online study so
that idea has to be expressed in the
opening sentence just keep it simple
just say online learning is extremely
convenient or is more convenient than
going to university ok
so don't over complicate it just keep it
right on topic there instead of killing
time you can say it wasting time wasting
time it give you a few more minutes
good well done devout on YouTube that's
not a bad paragraph let's go back in
here okay okay the most important cause
for students to take online classes is
convenience I would say the most
important cause I'd say the main course
okay main cause is convenience excellent
very clear well done most students are
stressed for time and work part-time and
find it easier to take classes based on
their availability
here we go evidence the latest research
shows that at least 50% of students work
part-time and find it difficult to
balance their schedules good well done
you've made that up that's that's that's
not a fact that you've put in there but
that that's okay that's fine you don't
need to be true there that's fine good
and a closing sentence ultimately online
learning makes it convenient for
students to stick to their study
schedule well done really well
structured logical paragraph they're
good the principle reason that students
prefer to study online rather than
attend university classes is because it
is more convenient for them as it is
easier for them to study at home or in
their room rather than going to the
other end of the city good that's fine
that was the opening sentence now you
need to do the support the evidence and
the closing it should be at least four
sentences you can of course write more
if you want the major benefit of
e-learning is its convenience being able
to be at home or far from campus while
studying is a major advantage the
student can perform all tasks of the
comfort of his home and also reduce
significantly his costs like traveling
rent etc thus as is discussed in the
paragraph no you don't write that just
right
thus online learning is more convenient
and therefore more popular okay so don't
refer back to the paragraph or anything
many students are convenient to use
online course two there okay that one
needs some grammatical work that you
definitely need to have feedback or some
tutorials if you do need feedback or
tutorials by the way do check out e to
language comm sign up to one of our paid
packages you can do one-on-ones with the
teacher like this you can also get
written free
back on your essays which is extremely
effective good fine I don't know labor
to long on this let's go back to it okay
now we're going to talk about cause to
so we've talked about one of the causes
of people leaving universities is
because of the convenience of online
learning now in our next paragraph we
need a separate idea we can't talk about
convenience again because we've talked
about it we need a separate distinct
idea from convenience of why people
prefer online learning okay so let's see
what I wrote I wrote this the secondary
reason my students are opting for online
study over in class study is because of
the increasing effectiveness of learning
technology every day there are
breakthroughs and elearning which
improve traditional classroom teaching
techniques for example on-demand video
allows students to stop and pause the
video and watch it later which
contributes to comprehension of subject
matter these technological developments
are happening rapidly and I'm improving
upon the effectiveness of classroom
based learning you can see my four
sentence paragraph structure here I've
got my opening sentence here and I where
I just mentioned effectiveness a single
idea and then I have my supporting
sentence here and then I give my
evidence here as an example and then I
have a closing sentence here which links
back to that opening sentence okay and
you can see that this paragraph is
distinct in its idea in its theme it has
a single theme which is effectiveness
and it's different from paragraph one's
theme okay cool your turn I want you to
write one paragraph about how the
effectiveness how effective online
learning is and how that is resulting in
fewer students attending you
versity classes so I want a four
sentence paragraph where you have an
opening sentence where you mention
effectiveness in general I want a
supporting sentence where you add
information to the idea of effectiveness
I want some evidence like an example an
instance or statistic and I want a
closing sentence where you link back to
the opening sentence about effectiveness
again I'll give you four minutes to do
this one
alright alright alright alright let's
have a look here effectiveness
effectiveness effectiveness here we go
the second reason I think it
effectiveness one have while study
online oh not good grammar the structure
looks ok one of the main reasons for
this is that if they miss out on
anything then they will get enough time
to see the video again and cover up
their gap ok that's probably not about
effectiveness that's more like
flexibility so make sure if you're
choosing effectiveness you write about
how the online learning technology helps
to helps you to learn not about how it's
convenient or flexible so if it's about
effectiveness you write about
effectiveness if you're writing about
flexibility you write about flexibility
if you're writing about convenience you
write about convenience ok so don't go
off-topic that's the key there another
highlighting cause of why online
learning is preferred over university
classes is because of its effectiveness
where we see where we see a higher
number of students opting for online
classes is resulting in better knowledge
of the subject matter based on the
one-to-one interactions with the
professionals who guide them more
specifically to their understanding
having said that students are able to
overcome unnecessary distractions and
focus and focus being more effective
through online learning medium it's it's
really good but it's just the sentence
structure is just a little bit off there
so maybe simplify your sentences a bit
more one of the key things in IELTS is
when you type on a computer you type a
sentence and you think hmm that's not
very good you'll delete this bit you
move this bit to the front in IELTS are
using a pen and paper there's no moving
stuff around so you have to think of
your sentence before you write it ok
this is a real difference in IELTS
writing task 2 with the pen and paper
versus like the Pte where you or the
TOEFL where you use the computer so
think of your sentences before you write
them make sure they're coming out
clearly ok
online courses improve effectiveness in
students results improves effectiveness
in student improve students results
because of its effectiveness that would
be a better sentence they feel more
comfortable because of the flexibility
Nara so we've talked about effectiveness
and then we've gone to flexibility no
effectiveness effectiveness
effectiveness you stick to that theme
that topic okay another guiding factor
why students are opting for online study
over in-class study is due to the
effectiveness of online learning ongoing
research and developments on preparing
these online courses with high end
graphics increases the effectiveness and
it attracts a lot of students online
tutorials provide options to choose from
effective resources the recent study
suggests 65% of the students prefer
online learning as its effectiveness is
the prime reason the current ongoing
technological developments increases the
effectiveness of online study by many
folds very good a few funny words in
there but but very good and it was
single themed on topic didn't talk about
anything else but effectiveness you may
want to use synonyms for effectiveness
like you might want to say something
like we increases learning outcomes or
improves knowledge of subject matter it
is effective but instead of using the
same word effectiveness you can use
effective or something like that
good good good well done well done these
are looking good I'll read one more more
over online learning became much more
effective than traditional ways of
learning thanks to the technology
different teaching methods could be
incorporated in the teaching process
that favors distance learning online
sessions 3d animated lessons and easy
accessibility of the learning materials
allow better understanding the
appearance of this variety of teaching
methodology made online no more
learning more effective than campus
learning very good little bit off topic
with about the appearance and stuff but
but very good well done well done good
paragraph well done cool all right so so
far in our essay for the problem
solutions we've written this we have an
introduction which we know now is the
three sentence introduction we've
written paragraph one about the first
cause which was convenience we've
written a paragraph which is the second
cause which is effectiveness now we've
written 219 words the reason why I
wanted to focus on this essay prompt is
because it's a little bit different than
the other essay prompts you needed to
talk about problem causes causes not
cause causes to at least two and we did
that by talking about convenience and
effectiveness but you also needed to
talk about solutions now we can't write
two more paragraphs so we're going to
have to talk about solutions plural in a
single paragraph I told you before that
I want you to keep your ideas separate
one paragraph about convenience another
paragraph about effectiveness or
flexibility and not to blend your
paragraphs together but sometimes we
need to incorporate various examples let
me show you what I mean here so we're
going to write one paragraph that talks
about solutions plural more than one and
our paragraph is going to look like this
we're going to have an opening sentence
we're going to have three examples
example one firstly example two secondly
example three thirdly and a closing
sentence and we're doing this because we
need to talk about solutions in a single
paragraph so it's going to sort of look
B like this it'll still have a logical
structure we're still going to have an
opening sentence example1 example2
example3 and then a closing sentence
so it's still logical let me read you
mind I'll show you what I mean despite
the rapid development of technology in
the exodus of students from on-campus
classes there are several measures or
solutions that universities can take to
remediate the issue firstly they could
stop broadcasting their lectures online
secondly they could improve the
on-campus resources thirdly they could
improve I'm sorry that should say they
could they could that's a mistake they
could foster an on-campus community
closing sentence all of these measures
would help to bring students back to
class so what I've done here is I've
talked about solutions plural more than
one in fact I've given three solutions
in this one paragraph now the first
paragraph structure that I showed you
the four sentence one is the most
important one but sometimes you might
need to squeeze more than one idea into
a paragraph in which case you will use
this paragraph structure so I've talked
about causes and in my third paragraph
I'm gonna mention solutions plural using
this paragraph structure you can see now
that I've fully answered the question
because the question asked me to talk
about causes and solutions so I wrote
two paragraphs about causes separate
causes kept the ideas distinct in my
third paragraph talk about solutions
plural more than one cool so your turn I
want you to write one paragraph about
how universities can bring students back
to campus I want you to mention three
examples one should have an opening
sentence where you just mention that
universities the solution to this the
solution right example1 example2
example3 just single sentences and then
a closing sentence I'm going to give you
four minutes to write this paragraph
you
all right let's have a look at what's
going on here and I see one of those
interesting paragraphs that mentions
three examples here we go
universities are the key of education
they supposed to bring students back to
campus firstly they should offer okay
universities are the key of education No
the opening sentence should mention the
word solutions or measures or something
of how they can bring students back so
don't go off topic and say there it's
not a broad background sentence saying
there are several things universities
can do to bring students back to campus
first second third for example let's
read your examples firstly they should
offer new programs that students find
more interesting good excellent secondly
the time of study should be adjusted to
students excellent thirdly the
facilities should be improved so that
students feel convenient in on campus
these three things are what its students
want to study on campus yes good
I love reading good ideas it's fantastic
here we go in this area of rapid
technological advancement and the
declining interest of students towards
on-campus study there are several steps
that universities can take to remediate
or resolve the issue firstly they can
increase the on campus resources
secondly they can upgrade the lecture
content thirdly they can enhance the use
of technology and blend it with current
tutorials all these measures would help
to attract students back to class that
is a beautiful beautiful paragraph
that's worthy there's a few small errors
in there but that paragraph is around
the IELTS 88.5 mark I think probably
eight point five it is seriously spot on
well done what else we got I'm gonna
here we go
while online classes are becoming
popular there are several measures take
taken by universities know several
measures that could be taken by
universities remember you're offering
in here several measures that could be
taken by universities to change the
trend good intro sentence well done
opening sentence firstly they can have
nuclear centers to enable classes closer
to student living quarters secondly they
can increase the interactions between
tutors and students thus increasing
effectiveness thirdly they can start
student clubs on campus on popular
topics all of these measures will help
popularize learning on campus that is
also a brilliant paragraph well done
really really good fantastic so yeah so
we learned two different paragraph
structures we learned the four sentence
paragraph structure when we talk about a
single idea and then we learned this
five sentence paragraph structure when
we want to include several examples
within it so like the solutions for
example and there they're only two
paragraphs you need by the way so what
does our essay look like so far well
this was the question prompt I'm gonna
read the whole thing to you please do
listen to this it's important
so the question prompt said every year
more and more students choose to study
online rather than attend classes on
campus what do you think of the causes
of this what solutions can you suggest
so this is from the perspective of the
university because this is a problem for
the university so the university needs
some solutions and I so far have written
this my introduction three sentences I
start with a background statement then I
rewrite the question and then I say this
essay will so I said studying online is
becoming increasingly popular each year
more students opt to study online as
opposed to attending classes on campus
this essay will discuss why this is
happening and put forward several
solutions for this issue you can see
that my introduction this essay will one
discuss why this is happening which is
right here and right here and to put
forward several solutions for this issue
this is my third paragraph remember I
had the one too
three examples in there you can see how
this structure completely satisfies the
IELTS writing criteria it completely
answers the question
you can't partially answer the question
you can expect to get a good band score
you can't just put forth one cause and
one solution or you can't put forward
two causes you have to put forward
causes which we've done two paragraphs
and solutions and at the same time you
have to write more than 250 words okay
this is there's a lot going on with
IELTS writing task 2 if you're looking
for an 8 you need to really get this
stuff right if you're looking for a 6
point 5 or 7 you still need to get all
of these structures correct your grammar
might not be so good but if you can get
the structure right in the word length
right then you're going to do far better
than if you don't
okay cool so you can see the logic of
this essay now we haven't written a
conclusion that will come next if you
need any help with your essay writing
please go to e to language comm we have
hundreds and hundreds of grammar video
lessons we've got methods lessons on all
the different academic writing task 1
task 2 we've got methods lessons tips
strategies vocabulary lists all sorts of
stuff there as well as reading listening
as well as speaking as well so if you
need help do you sign up for a free
account at e to language comm if you're
a free user do you think about upgrading
to become a paid user to get tutorials
feedback to boost your IELTS band score
cool that's all from me let's go to the
chat and answer some questions if you
have any questions please put them into
the chat well done by the way looking
good really nice paragraphs nice nice
writing well done yeah so I'm just gonna
wait for questions to pop in
always rasa what's the difference
between
aeo and British Council I don't know
what ieo is no idea in Australia there's
IDP they run the IELTS and in the UK and
there's the British Council who run the
IELTS so I think they have different
testing centres but that's it which one
is better they're both the same there's
no difference between the two doesn't
matter if you take your test at an IDP
Testing Center or a British Council
testing centre it's no difference
Prabhakar J where is the conclusion
that's coming next week Prabhakar so
please log in next week how can we
manage time to write all of this I mean
it's a long paragraph yeah you have 40
minutes so you have 20 minutes for your
writing task 1 then you have 40 minutes
to write 250 words it is it is tough it
is tough the key that the key is knowing
this structure and practicing it really
really is I think if people actually
practice for the IELTS I don't think
there'd be as many failures as there are
I'm ed I need a speaking online session
fantastic we offer one-on-one tutorials
with IELTS experts Ahmed so think about
signing up for a paid package we'll give
you feedback on your pronunciation your
fluency your task response all of that
sort of stuff your vocabulary
what sorry Sal send dari please write
your question again I got 6.5 on writing
I want to improve but I have a bad
handwriting how can I improve if your
handwriting is really bad you may want
to think about switching tests to the PT
or to the TOEFL so you can type your
essay what's the difference between an
IELTS seven eight and nine okay there
are four things that the IELTS
examiner's grade you on one is grammar
so you'll get an IELTS 9 if you have
perfect grammar you can IELTS 8 if you
have a few little mistakes
good night at 7 if you're making some
pretty bad mistakes and so on second
thing is vocabulary you your use of
collocations of precise vocabulary third
thing they grade you on is structure so
if you're using the e to language
structure you're going to get for that
section at least you'll get an IELTS 9
if you do it correctly the last thing
they grade you on is task achievement or
task response which means that you have
written directly about the question
prompt you didn't go off topic okay so
they're the four things that they grade
you on I've got a question here that
from encima this is the first time I'm
giving IELTS I'm confused from where to
start if you sign up to e2 language the
first thing that you get is a study plan
consultation with the teacher the
teacher will sit you down and go through
your previous test scores talk about
your weaknesses and tell you how to
prepare for the IELTS I'm ed I need a
tutorial good bronze package silver
package Gold Package Platinum package on
e2 language comm fine I am not this much
expert to do to define no no really did
you okay cool
I'm gonna leave it there guys I'm going
to see you next time thanks very much
for coming along I appreciate it if
you're on youtube please click like
subscribe and write
something into the comments thank you
you